lib/ultralib/README.md, before:

# ultralib

Reverse engineering of libultra

## Compatibility

Currently this repo supports building the following versions:

| IDO / GCC  | `libultra.a` / `libgultra.a` | `libultra_d.a` / `libgultra_d.a` | `libultra_rom.a` / `libgultra_rom.a` |
| -          | :-: | :-: | :-: |
| 2.0E       | :x: / N/A | :x: / N/A | :x: / N/A |
| 2.0F       | :x: / N/A | :x: / N/A | :x: / N/A |
| 2.0G       | :x: / N/A | :x: / N/A | :x: / N/A |
| 2.0H       | :x: / :x: | :x: / :x: | :x: / :x: |
| 2.0I       | :x: / :x: | :x: / :x: | :x: / :x: |
| 2.0I_patch | :x: / :x: | :x: / :x: | :x: / :x: |
| 2.0J       | :x: / :x: | :x: / :x: | :x: / :x: |
| 2.0K       | :x: / :x: | :x: / :x: | :x: / :x: |
| 2.0L       | :heavy_check_mark: / :heavy_check_mark: | :x: / :heavy_check_mark: | :heavy_check_mark: / :heavy_check_mark: |
| ique_v1.5  | :x: | :x: | :x: |

## Preparation

After cloning the repo, put a copy of the target archive on the root of this directory.

## Build dependencies

The build process requires the following packages:

- build-essential
- python3
- binutils-mips-linux-gnu (libultra* only)

Under Debian / Ubunutu you can install them with the following commands:

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install build-essential python3
```

If building any libultra you can install binutils-mips-linux-gnu with:

```bash
sudo apt install binutils-mips-linux-gnu
```

## Building

- `make setup`
- `make`

Commit message:

Lib Start (#41)
* hasm -> asm

* git subrepo pull lib/ultralib

subrepo:
  subdir:   "lib/ultralib"
  merged:   "6c1f306"
upstream:
  origin:   "git@github.com:decompals/ultralib.git"
  branch:   "main"
  commit:   "6c1f306"
git-subrepo:
  version:  "0.4.6"
  origin:   "git@github.com:ingydotnet/git-subrepo.git"
  commit:   "110b9eb"

* Fix build

* ultralib WIP

* Try linking in libultra archive

* Some cleanup

* new overlays yaml

* Font splat extension fixes

* Builds now

* Update requirments.txt

* newline

* Levenshtein

lib/ultralib/README.md, after:

# ultralib

Reverse engineering of libultra

## Compatibility

Currently this repo supports building the following versions:

| IDO / GCC  | `libultra.a` / `libgultra.a` | `libultra_d.a` / `libgultra_d.a` | `libultra_rom.a` / `libgultra_rom.a` |
| -          | :-: | :-: | :-: |
| 2.0E       | :x: / N/A | :x: / N/A | :x: / N/A |
| 2.0F       | :x: / N/A | :x: / N/A | :x: / N/A |
| 2.0G       | :x: / N/A | :x: / N/A | :x: / N/A |
| 2.0H       | N/A / :x: | N/A / :x: | N/A / :x: |
| 2.0I       | :heavy_check_mark: / :heavy_check_mark: | :x: / :heavy_check_mark: | :heavy_check_mark: / :heavy_check_mark: |
| 2.0I_patch | :x: / :x: | :x: / :x: | :x: / :x: |
| 2.0J       | :heavy_check_mark: / :heavy_check_mark: | :x: / :heavy_check_mark: | :heavy_check_mark: / :heavy_check_mark: |
| 2.0K       | :heavy_check_mark: / :heavy_check_mark: | :x: / :heavy_check_mark: | :heavy_check_mark: / :heavy_check_mark: |
| 2.0L       | :heavy_check_mark: / :heavy_check_mark: | :x: / :heavy_check_mark: | :heavy_check_mark: / :heavy_check_mark: |
| ique_v1.5  | :x: | :x: | :x: |

## Preparation

After cloning the repo, put a copy of the target archive(s) in their correct version folder in `base/`.
For example, if your target archive is libgultra_rom.a 2.0L then you'd place it in `base/L/`.
If you will be building without a target archive by setting `COMPARE=0` then you can skip this step.

## Build dependencies

The build process requires the following packages:

- build-essential
- python3
- binutils-mips-linux-gnu (libultra* only)

Under Debian / Ubunutu you can install them with the following commands:

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install build-essential python3
```

If building any libultra you can install binutils-mips-linux-gnu with:

```bash
sudo apt install binutils-mips-linux-gnu
```

## Building

Run make setup with the proper flags set followed by make with optional jobs.
For example, if building the 2.0L PC archive you'd do the following: 

- `make VERSION=L TARGET=libgultra_rom setup`
- `make VERSION=L TARGET=libgultra_rom`

Every target flag combination requires separate a setup command.

If building without an target archive, than you can use `COMPARE=0` like the the following:

- `make VERSION=L TARGET=libgultra_rom COMPARE=0 setup`
- `make VERSION=L TARGET=libgultra_rom COMPARE=0`

note that running setup without `COMPARE=0` and no archive will result in an error,
and only needs to be run once instead of per target flag combination
